---
layout: category-post
title:  "Reads for VCs"
date:   2021-04-1
categories: notes
permalink: "venture-articles"
---

I'm doing a [venture fellowship](https://republic.co/blog/partners/call-for-applications-republic-s-venture-fellow-and-amp-associate-program-spring) at Republic! Here are pre-reads and my notes. To anyone at Republic—I'll take this down if it ends up violating the NDA.

#### What is VC?

**[55 Things Learned as a 19 Year Old in VC](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=25247a4f-a7af-4836-a7f9-12117b650b5d&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Tiffany Zhong

- VC is **unstructured**, and successful VCs are self-motivated and organized. Key tips:
  - **Time**: block off time for projects. Use calendars.
  - **Emails**: figure out a [workflow](https://associate.vc/the-best-e-mail-workflow-no-extensions-needed-1eb296eaf069#.k0j6wd8ht), install [Streak](https://www.streak.com/), create filters for subscriptions. Be short and sweet; suggest times in the recipient timezone. [Double opt-in intros](https://twitter.com/chrisfralic/status/570627256655212545).
  - **Meetings**: 15m calls for chats, 30m calls for intros, 1h if local.
- It's all about **mindset**. Good VCs are:
  - **Right**. Develop good judgement about investments over time.
  - **Modest**. Admit gaps in knowledge and adopt a growth mindset.
  - **Transparent**. Be honest and show integrity; don't gossip.
  - **Hard workers**. Passion and hustle can outweigh intelligence.
  - **Analytical.** Don't get caught up in hype; evaluate logically.
- Action items for VCs:
  - Master persuasion and power dynamics.
  - Ask **persistent questions**. And good questions, like "What are your biggest concerns?" And learn to distinguish correct answers from smart answers.
  - Talk to people! VCs hang out on Twitter.
- For **consumer products**:
  - Either **social or transactional**.
  - Social products should 1) possess **utility**, 2) leverage **narcissism**, 3) be **entertaining**, and 4) have a **community**. They evolve from Utility → Platform → Ecosystem.
  - Consumer marketplaces require 1) positive **unit economics**, 2) good **branding**, 3) a **strong community**, and 4) **SEO/ASO**.

**[How do Venture Capitalists Make Decisions?](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=aa7492b7-ed42-4617-8678-8a99a4ddf208&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Antoine Buteau

- Facts about deals:

  - Only **0.25% of companies** are venture financed, but **50% of U.S. IPOs** are VC-backed, accounting for 20% of U.S. market cap and 44% of R&D spending.

  - Most deals (54%) come are sourced or come from a **network**, while the remaining are referred, inbound from management, or referred by a portfolio company.

  - Only **2%** of considered companies closed a term sheet. The process goes:

    Considered —(28%)→ Met Management —(36%)→ Reviewed with LPs —(48%)→ Due Diligence —(35%)→ Term Sheet —(59%)→ Closed

- Facts about investments: 
  - When **selecting** investments, the **team** is the biggest factor (53% early stage, 39% late stage), followed by business model, product, fit, market, and industry. VCs don't care about valuation
  - VCs use cash-on-cash, multiple of capital, and net IRR instead of DCFs or NPV. Only 80% of VCs and 69% of early stage VCs forecast cash flows.
  - Most term sheets involve **pro-rata and participation rights**, while a minority outline redemption rights, cumulative dividends, full-ratchet antidiluation, and 2x+ liquidation preferences.
  - VCs **syndicate 65% of their investments** to share risk, build reputation, conserve capital, and gain expertise.
- After the deal: 
  - After investing, VCs add value by hiring board members and employees, connecting customers and investors, and offering strategic and operational guidance.
  - Only **12%** of early stage investments and **19%** of late stage investments end up with an **IPO**. While 50% and 60% exit through M&A, respectively, these are mostly disguised failures.

**[A Brief History of the World of VC](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=93af0a33-53ef-425d-97a1-fc778cf470c7&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Nicolas Colin

- **Information systems** and **limited liability** made equity more attractive
  - Prior, companies raised money through **credit**. They couldn't verify investments and were liable for money owed by the company.
  - Accounting technologies made information reliable. In 1811, New York led other states in introducing limited liability.
- Tech startups relied on **government**.
  - New ventures were hard for the public to find and invest in. They also lacked tangible assets and clear earning potential.
  - Amidst World War 2, **Vannevar Bush** directed the government to fund military research at universities.
- **Stanford** gave birth to Silicon Valley
  - **Frederic Terman** encouraged military partnerships and student entreprenuership.
- VC exploded after legal changes and personal computing.
  - Fueled by the **Small Business Investment Act**, the Bay Area gave birth to the first limited partnerships.
  - The Internet provided VCs abundant investment opportunities.
  - In Europe, capital is weighted so little that people invest in VC even when it performs poorly—the next step is to rigorize VC.

**[Tech & VC: The Foundation](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=1c6cbeb2-828f-448b-b18b-1208db0abfe6&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Paige Doherty

- Breaking in
  - **Cold emails** should *only* contain 1) praise, 2) project, 3) importance, 4) the ask, and 5) excitement.
  - **Avenues** include joining through startups, associate→principal→partner, angel investing, or content expertise
  - Create a **personal site** with any of: Squarespace, Wordpress, Wix, Tumblr, Webflow, GitHub, Notion

- Learning
  - List of [fellowships](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13mv0lQYlVCGA1F-UQohWrEkwIW4GwjmFtzhB270GcBc/edit#gid=1946680338)
  - Subscribe to newsletters, learn the vocab.

**Terms to know in VC** 

**[100+ VC Terms](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=c6f1b787-6411-41a1-870b-eb37a9a5683a&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Sergio Marrero

- VCs
  - **Capital call**: A fund prompts LPs to put in capital to finance an investment.
  - **Carried Interest**: Share of profits a manager can keep, usually 20-30%.
  - **Exit velocity**: Speed of an exit, usually higher for growth funds than accelerators since late-stage companies are closer to exit.
  - **Fund of funds/LP**: A fund that invests in PE and VC.
  - **GP**: A VC/PE firm that makes investment decisions.
  - **LP**: Provide capital to the fund.
  - **LPA**: Limited Partnership Agreement, between LP and GP.
  - **MFN**: Most favored nation; largest investor gets benefits of side letters with other LPs.
  - **Roll-up**: Acquiring and merging multiple small companies to achieve economies of scale.
  - **Side letter**: Agreement between a VC fund an individual investor.
- Funding rounds
  - **Down round**: The company is valued lower at a later round.
  - **Friends and family round**: Super early stage round.
  - **Inside round**: A round of financing composed of existing investors.
  - **Party round**: Raising small amounts of money from many small investors.
  - **Seed round**: Earliest round of fundraising, usually during product development.
  - **Washout round**: Everyone suffers *yuge* dilution.
- Term Sheet
  - **Anti-dilution clause**: Protects an investor from reductions in percent equity stake, increasing shares issuable upon conversion.
  - **Clawback**: Money already paid must be paid back under certain conditions.
  - **Control rights**: Control over voting, incurring indebtedness, board seats, and other key actions.
  - **Convertible**: The right to convert preferred shares to common shares. Usually automatic on IPO.
  - **(Negative) Covenant**: Obligation to do (or not do) something, such as obtain life insurance or not deviate from the budget. 
  - **Come/tag along rights**: Investor can sell shares if key employees sell shares.
  - **Cutback rights**: Determines who's shares are let out of an IPO to preserve price.
  - **Demand registration rights**: Require company to register investor shares for sale to public, even without a plan to IPO.
  - **Drag-along rights**: Require other shareholders to sell their shares or vote their shares to sell the company.
  - **First refusal/preemptive rights:** Right to prevent dilution by purchasing a pro rata share of all new stocks.
  - **Full ratchet**: Adjusts the conversion ratio so each share of preferred stock can be converted into the same number of common stock the investors could've bought at a lower price.
  - **Grandfather rights**: An old rule will apply to existing situations, while a new rule applies to future cases.
  - **Information rights**: Company provides financials, including stock ledger, stockholder list, and books/records.
  - **Investor's rights agreement:** Made by early or large investors, often including "**first offer**" (in future financing rounds) and "**observer rights**" (for board meetings).
  - **No-shop clause**: Founders can't share the term sheet with other investors.
  - **Over allotment option**: Right to exercise the first refusal rights and come along rights of other, non-exercising investors.
  - **Pay-to-play**: Require all investors to continue pro rata commitments.
  - **Piggyback registration rights**: Include shares in any IPO.
  - **Price antidilution protection**: Adjusts conversion ratio to counterbalance drops in price.
  - **Protective provisions**: Right to veto certain transactions.
  - **Pari passu**: On the same terms as.
  - **Ratchet**: Issue additional shares if IPO conversion doesn't meet the price paid by the investor.
  - **Redemption rights**: Force the company to repurchase investor's stock.
  - **Tag-along right**: Right of a minority investor to the same benefits as a majority investor.
  - **Weighted average**: Adjusts the conversion ratio to account for both the lower price and number of shares. Favors the investor more than broad-based weighted average.
- Equity
  - **Blended preferences**: Equal payment rights for all classes of preferred stock in liquidation.
  - **Cap table**: Shows ownership by investor.
  - **Cliff**: Period, usually one year, before which no employee stock options vest.
  - **Conversion rate/ratio**: Price of common stock in terms of preferred stock.
  - **Common stock**: Issued to founders, management, and employees; lower priority than preferred shares.
  - **Convertible debt**: A loan with a pre-determine debt-to-common-stock ratio.
  - **Exercise/strike price**: Amount paid to execute options, usually pegged to fair market value.
  - **Fair market value**: What investors are willing to pay. For private companies, based on comparables or recent transactions.
  - **Fully diluted**: Total common stock shares issued, after outstanding options, warrants, preferred stock, and convertible debt.
  - **Liquidation preference:** Order that investors are paid in event of liquidation or bankruptcy.
  - **Option pool**: Shares of common stock that can be sold without triggering antidilution protection, often 15%.
  - **Participating preferred stock**: Class of stock with right to share equally assets for liquidation after payment for preferred stock. Non-participating preferred stock holders choose between liquidation preference and common stock distribution.
  - **Preferred stock**: Receive dividends and liquidation preference.
  - **Restricted stock**: Restrictions on transfer or sale.
  - **Stacked/senior liquidation preference**: Higher liquidation preference than other stakeholders.
  - **Shares outstanding**: Stock held by all shareholders, used to calculate market cap and earnings per share.
  - **Stock option/warrants**: Right to purchase or sell a stop at a price within a period of time. Employees get options, investors get warrants.
  - **Vesting**: Employees only receive equity after a period of employment.
- Finance
  - **409A Valuation**: Third-party valuation.
  - **ARPU**: Average revenue per user.
  - **AOV**: Average order value.
  - **ARR**: Average recurring revenue.
  - **ARRG Ratio**: ARR over growth rate.
  - **EBIT**: Earnings before interest and taxes, a measure of operating profit.
  - **Gross margin**: Difference between revenue and COGs over revenue.
  - **Net revenue**: Accounts for discounts and refunds.
  - **PEG ratio**: Price over earnings to growth ratio determines trade-off between stock price, earnings per share, and expected growth.
  - **Revenue multiple**: TEV/TTM.
  - **TEV**: Total enterprise value.
  - **TTM**: Trailing 2 month revenue.

#### Technicals in VC

**[How to talk about valuation when a VC asks ](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=7021c322-ffa8-45e5-98b9-1354125a61be&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Mark Suster

- VCs look for **fit**, balancing early, mid, and late-stage deals.
- An overpriced last-round valuation means **dilution**, which deters VCs.
- Asking about existing funding gives a peak into **capital efficiency**.
- If **existing investors** are continuing to invest in a round, that a) means they remain confident in the company, but b) means you might have trouble getting target ownership.
- When dealing with **strategic investors** or **groups of investors**, startups will often just name a price.
- Startups should **ask questions**, like target ownership ranges or syndicate opportunities.

**[Growing our SaaS company to $1 Million+ ](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=bd2deec4-f0de-4a3d-bd31-0819c1a878b3&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**, Mike Kulakov

How did Everhour, a SaaS company, reach $1M ARR without VC money?

1. **Competitive advantage** by specializing and innovating features.
2. **Belief** in the product, using it internally.
3. Bootstrapping forces you to be **careful**, doing outsourcing and product development simultaneously.
4. **Freemium** can trap you with low conversion rates, about **0.5-1%**.
5. **Annual billing** can boost MRR 10-15%.
6. Tailor your **promotion channel**; consider going organic.

#### Diversity in VC

**[Top Angel Groups + VC Firms for Female Entrepreneurs](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=af121616-cda0-446b-95dc-a950f5c08302&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**

- Only **6%** of VC firms are led by women, and less than **10%** of VC capital goes to female-led startups.
- Lots of angel groups and VC firms support women!

**[Who is a VC? ](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=9de21a77-2d93-4704-8658-e8a6eb24ba9f&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**

Across a sample of 1,500 VC professionals:

- 74% are white and 23% are Asian.
- Only **11% are female**.
- There were **no Hispanic or black females**.
- 28% have an engineering degree and 41% have **operating experience**.
- **Diverse** teams **increase performance** on every measure.

**[Why are there so few Black investors? ](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=68fcede9-b5e3-4244-9831-688367d47b89&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**

- Across 2,000 investors, only 1.5% were black; for larger funds, it's **less than 1%**.
- African-Americans may lack connections and role models.
- Some strategies to diversify:
  - Programs that connect undergrad CS majors with SV startups
  - Black/minority investment networks and communities.

**[Yes, I'm a 26 Year Old Female Venture Capitalist - Here's How & Why ](http://ec2-52-26-194-35.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/x/d?c=11978960&l=2a9c4607-924f-4b2a-aaa6-316caf90a36c&r=f4b82b96-3f30-4561-b0e7-d4b2c82a6911)**

- Statistics can be demotivating, but don't let them imbue undue pessimism.
- Emphasizing non-traditional backgrounds can help shake the norm and improve diversity in VC.

